Hi Stefan! Good seeing you!
Hi, Mike. How you doing?
Pretty good.
I guess we're here to talk about the evolution of Emacs Lisp.
You want to introduce yourself briefly?
Yes.
So I'm Stefan Monnier.
I do research and teaching in programming languages at University of Montreal.
How about you?
Yeah.
I'm CEO of a software consultancy in southern Germany.
So how do how did we get into this thing writing this paper?
Right.
I think a lot of people that are seeing a paper on the evolution of something
something Emacs would expect Richard Stallman to be here.
Right.
Well,
at least,
you know,
I work in programming languages.
So there is some relationship. I've been contributing to Emacs
for many,
many years,
I've been maintainer of Emacs.
So that's how I ended up here.
Okay.
I think,
I think I was contacted by Guy Steele and by you to to see there was some
interest in working on this.
How about you?
So,
you know,
even though I work in the software consultancy today,
I also used to be a research and programming languages many years ago.
I remember when I started working there at the University of Tübingen about 30 years ago,
we were looking at Emacs and we started using X windows and the version of Emacs that existed at the time
would only run in a terminal or an X term.
but there was a version of the Emacs that would allow you to open
multiple windows called Lucid Emacs.
So we started using that and then I think it didn't run on Linux.
We started usually using at the time and I ported that and I started contributing code.
And that kind of segued into me doing more and more development on first Lucid Emacs
and Lucid Emacs was done by a company called Lucid.
That company folded eventually,
and the project moved to Sun Microsystems,
actually,
where it was renamed to XEmacs by the marketing people there.
So I started using Emacs at the time and then I was a programming Languages researcher,
I think.
So,
I think we were like the two people among the recipients of Guy's
email who,
write,
or who used to write papers for living.
And we didn't say no.
Yeah,
so it was a lot of work.
But we're here to talk about Emacs lisp, right?
Not primarily the editor,
but the programming language of the editor.
So how come,
how come Lisp is like the language of Emacs?
Or what does that have to do with the editor?
The language?
Yeah,
actually,
it it's interesting you ask it this way,
because the first language of Emacs was not Lisp,
it was TECO.
It was TECO, yeah. Ok.
So I think Richard Stallman worked on TECO as well.
Or on the TECO version of Emacs at the time.
That's right.
So the first version of Emacs was written by Richard and many others in TECO.
And so I think you have an example ...
I have an example.
So here let's try this fancy switching feature here.
So here's an example of TECO code and you can kind of see well you get an inkling why
it wasn't Richard Stallman favorite language to put into,
the version of Emacs that he then started developing later.
So the code looks fairly cryptic and you can see every single line kind of requires a comment to explain
what it is.
So you can kind of see that it maybe would not scale so well to both to larger code bases
and also to lots of people were interested in doing something with Emacs,
So that explains why it's not Chico but why is it Emacs Lisp?
Well,
Richard was working at MIT
where Lisp was very popular in the in the lab where he was working.
So he was very familiar with Lisp.
He was using Lisp all the time.
He was probably editing Lisp with TECO Emacs.
Okay.
But I think that was you know,
there was the main the main reason for using it.
It was the obvious choice and I think it is to this day it is his favorite language.
Okay.
But I guess,
I mean Richard Stallman also founded the GNU project, right?
And Emacs is kind of the founding piece of software of that project.
So we all know that it's a very political and idealistic project.
So can we can we draw a line from Emacs Lisp to the ideals of the GNU project?
Yeah, I think so.
I think I think um access in you know really
embodies the some of the ideas he has the idea of empowering the
user and okay,
this is this is a driving line in in the design of Emacs and Emacs list
and and it also in his his promotion of free software.
So empowering the user I guess means not just being able to use the software to its full
ability,
but also to be able to customize it and modify it.
Right.
Yeah.
If you think of the the ideals of free software and you have this,
you know,
being allowed to read the code or they say
studying the code and modify the code,
redistribute the code.
This is all all nice.
But for richard this is actually not sufficient
because you also wanted to be fairly easy to do
for in practice.
So you also have kind of pragmatic,
pragmatic aspect to it.
Okay.
So I guess,
yeah.
Today,
when we look at a programming language like Emacs list,
right?
We think of it mainly as a programmer's language.
Right?
Um and I think it wasn't until,
you know,
you pointed this out to me uh switch
here to the documentation here.
Um So you pointed out to me that,
well,
here's the introduction of Emacs list as it sits in the Emacs editor in Chief Ships with the ex
editor and says this is an introduction to programming indexes for people who are not
programmers.
So um uh and I never saw this all these years uh that I was using
Emacs and Emacs that it was that there's actually a fair amount of effort being made
uh to make it accessible to do non programmers as well.
Right?
I think that's kind of gone out of fashion fashion since then.
Right.
That that ordinary users would program,
it's definitely not in fashion in the world of of android and those kinds of and
facebook,
you know,
empowering user is not definitely not the goal.
But but back then it was it was I think also you know,
mentioned experience with uh with having,
you know,
secretaries using Emacs and secretaries who had no experience with programming
right to make it here and using Emacs and writing.
Little chance of Avila's code to customize their their editor for their particular use.
So,
I think that's always been a very important aspect to Richard.
Yeah,
I mean,
I guess even,
you know,
if you can't program,
you expressed yourself,
you might get somebody else to do it,
right.
Um,
which is something that you can't do with software that isn't customizable or it doesn't have
its own programming language or extension language that comes with it.
And so,
um,
well I see it,
you know,
I work in a lot of sort of digital transformation projects and there I talk to the managers a lot.
This idea that the users would be able to modify or to a larger degree customize the
software is really something it's very alien to them.
So,
um,
I wish we would get back to the ideals of Emacs um,
and Emacs lisp at some point.
So I guess that's that's what we're going to talk about today.
Okay.
So I guess we should give like a brief overview of what Emacs list is,
at least for the younger people who don't want lisp in the audience.
Right?
So Emacs list is a list and that means uh well it's instantly
recognizable to anyone By the syntax,
right?
The syntax works in that there's a lot of round parentheses,
and also there's prefix notation.
So if you want to add two numbers like 23 and 42,
you write it like this open paren operator goes at the front,
then the operations and then close parent.
And you can see I'm typing that into the scratch buffer of X.
M.
X.
And I can just close your button control J and it will display the result of
evaluating um that expression.
And uh you know,
these parentheses,
you can also nest them.
So there's no precedence rules,
like there are in a lot of other programming languages,
or I can You don't have like the sum of 23 and the product of
15 and 42.
And again,
I can press control J and it will instantly display the result of evaluating
that a lot of people looking at this kind of get scared by all of these parentheses.
But experienced list programmers just look at the indentation.
And in fact,
you know,
Emacs will automatically identify,
press a button uh in a way that is uh that is just pretty much standardized and that
everybody everybody adheres to that standard when they end their program.
All right,
we could also do like a variable.
So here's a variable,
I don't know.
Uh huh.
Something like this.
So,
here's here's Pie.
Right?
And then I can just evaluate Pie.
And it will give me It will give me the value that comes with it.
And I could also write a function,
you know,
let me write a function that computes the circumference of a circle with a radius
might look like this.
Uh and again,
I can evaluate that will define that function and all I can say,
well,
what's the circumference of a circle of radius 10?
And it will display the result of that.
So it's not just the fact that it's this programming language with parentheses,
but also with Emacs,
there's also instantly an interactive programming environment for it.
Now you can also locally bind variables in uh the
next list with a construct called let so you can do this,
you know?
Um and so 10 and 20 bound to
variables X and Y.
You could evaluate this and get a result.
So that gives me local variables.
And now here's something that I guess nowadays is pretty unique to the
next list.
You know,
I could write a function called F takes a parameter called
X.
And I could add X to Y.
And now there's no visible binding for why?
Right.
Um And of course if I kind of do you know F.
F five?
It will say oh,
symbols,
variable is void.
Is symbols value as variables void.
Why?
So why is not bound?
But I can't bind it using lit.
Right?
So I can do this.
I can bind Y 27 and then I can call effort five
and it will give me the value of 12.
And this is a feature known as dynamic scoping.
And you know every every piece of code that we've seen so far.
Actually,
an Emacs list could also be a matchless program.
So necklace was one of the predecessors of the Emacs list was just a regular list implementation that
existed at the time.
Right?
So,
so there's a strange thing is that the binding that we do with let
uh works more like an assignment.
Right?
So,
so when f refers to why it doesn't refer to kind of electrically
bound binding of of why,
but to the one that was done last at runtime.
So uh there's dynamic scoping and it seems just
very unusual to do that.
Right?
Why?
Why Stefan is their dynamic scoping in Emacs list?
Is that a feature or is it a bug?
Oh,
there's a feature.
Okay,
so can you show me something I can actually do with dynamic scoping?
Yeah,
I can show you an example here.
I'm switching to your index.
Yeah.
So it's pretty over the next few months.
Um,
it's boring or than X M X.
I can say that much.
Okay,
so here is here is an example of an Emacs this package.
shows that somewhat randomly was just passing through the other day and you can see
has a bunch of variable declarations and then a bunch of function declarations
and I haven't hear folded.
So so you don't know overwhelmed with everything.
But so here,
for example,
the the search mv message function,
it doesn't really matter,
you know what it's for and but you can see that the first thing you can see
here is that it has a strange at the beginning.
Okay.
And that's not what you were asking me.
But since we see it,
I I just mentioned it.
So that's a that's a documentation string.
That's a kind of,
you know,
ancestor to the java doc style of programming.
It was actually introduced by richard Stallman,
but not in in access.
It was originally introduced in tico.
So he added into tico and then and then carried it to Emacs west and from there
it spread to other languages.
Okay,
so I guess that's another kind of facet of user empowerment.
Right?
That you I mean you can then easily look up that documentation and it kind of comes with the code.
Exactly.
So that that you know that is that there was also something that he
found as you know,
very,
very useful of the users.
And the one thing here you wanted,
you asked about it was this message Lloyd max binding here.
Not because it has this name,
but if you look this horrible is not used because it's it's using dynamic
binding,
dining scoping.
Sorry.
Um so this variable is really fundamentally past as a
configuration argument through the message function here.
The message function here is a kind of printer,
you know,
that just displays something in the media battle in the little window.
You have to be very bottom here and and
as it does that also it kind of records the message analog somewhere.
So you can recover the messages you've seen in the past.
And message log max is a variable.
You can you can use to tell the message,
you know how many messages to keep And more specifically in this case to just not log anything.
Okay,
so the implementation,
so the implementation of the message function looks at the message log max variable
exactly.
This is actually the C code,
you know,
we could show you but I don't think that's the point here.
Uh So so it's it's looked up in the C code in the as a normal
variable and here is bound to affect the behavior of message.
And this is used very commonly.
Not specifically for this variable but all kinds of functions have this
extra configuration passed in the and dynamic scoping.
Okay.
So the alternative to that I guess would be to have,
you know,
all the functions have lots of parameters.
Right.
Or some extra config parameter that's threaded through the code or pass code
everywhere.
So that that I guess makes dynamic scoping via feature.
Right?
Um Yes.
Yeah.
Very much so.
Okay.
Uh It's used,
you know,
it's using in in many places in the in the A.
P.
I.
In the core api o of Emacs is Okay.
Uh So Stefan the other day I tried the dynamic scoping example that I had earlier that f
function in group B.
M.
X.
Right.
The mx that you're working on and it it didn't work.
What's what's the matter?
What's up with that?
Could you could you take that into your Emacs just Yes of course you can
be fun at.
Yeah.
Just sex.
Ny Right.
Wine and then you let wider seven and call F.
With five.
Right so and Okay.
Right.
Uh Yeah.
Come well it's because a few
years back we actually changed the the default coping to be to be lexical scoping
instead of prostatic scoping instead of dynamic scoping.
Okay.
Yeah of course now this doesn't work anymore.
That's right.
So so but but all that I mean they're they're like a zillion code.
The zillion lines of code written in Emacs list.
Did that all break when you make that change?
It would have if we if we changed it just like that.
Yes of course.
But okay we just added a new direct instead.
Okay so there's now two dialects of Emacs list.
uh so there's statically scoped and then there's dynamically scoped.
So,
so I guess you found a way to kind of make,
I mean we said dynamic scoping is a feature and you needed to kind of configure things
um and and add additional parameters.
Pass additional parameters into Emacs list functions.
So um so I guess you made that work.
Why didn't Stallman do that originally?
Right.
I mean he started working on,
you know this version of Emacs in the eighties and at that time,
you know,
skiing was available,
Communist was available every other language on the planet.
Pretty much used Sadiq scoping,
how come?
Well,
I think I think it was mostly because first he had a lot of experience with dynamic scoping.
The group.
There was working was using Macallister and least machine list.
All of these were using dynamic scoping.
He also,
you know,
he also liked multex Emacs,
as you know,
there were lots of lots of variants of Emacs back then when louis max was started
and I think multi C max was definitely the one that was to him are one of the
most successful ones.
Mhm.
And multi screen actors using Macallister and uses dynamic scoping and in the style of
code,
you're right in in multi C max,
your dynamic scoping was also used very,
very commonly.
So he had a fair bit of experience.
Also back then,
you know,
we should not forget that back then in in in this particular context,
dynamic scoping was considered insufficient,
whereas lexical scoping was kind of the new guy on the block and it wasn't
quite clear exactly what they would,
you know,
it seems kind of expensive to implement,
there were ideas of how to make it work efficiently,
but you know,
it was not as obvious.
Okay,
so I guess the point is right with lexical scoping,
you need to create closures when there's a lambda expression in your program.
Right?
And uh so you need to come out somehow package up all the variables or use in
the body of the lambda,
right?
And then you have to look for them in the different levels of the environment and
depending on how you represent your environment,
at least in It wasn't exactly how the true word back.
Okay,
so,
but but how did how did people work for like 20 years,
2030 years with just dynamic scoping available to them?
Right.
If λ doesn't bind local three variables,
then,
you know,
that must be a major pain.
Right?
Um No,
no,
actually you can you can live dynamic scoping is perfectly sufficient.
Okay,
so we had this,
technically there's only two main issues with diarrhea scoping is one of them.
Is is a name conflict.
Okay.
You have to you have to be more careful when you how you name your variables.
If you if we go back to my example of I search many buffer,
I search and package,
you'll see that all the variables declared here,
they all start with the search and be okay.
And so this is basically we use what they call,
what we call a name space prefix that makes it clear that this variable
belongs to this package and so it tries to avoid
or it aims to avoid conflict with other packages,
uses using the same variable.
Further other purposes.
Okay.
So you can still have conflicts within the package,
but you know,
presumably the author knows what he's doing so,
but it's easy to avoid,
but if you look inside inside functions then you'll see,
for example,
here,
you know,
we're just buying the count variable here.
We by buying the land variable.
There's no no name for,
no need for name space prefix for the local local variables.
It's not as costly as you think.
It makes it reasonably clear when you have a dynamically scoped variable like we had
here in the example of message log max as opposed to a local
variable.
This that could use lexical scoping or that doesn't really matter because just local.
Yeah.
Okay.
Can you pull up the example that you just had with a comparable?
Uh All right.
So I guess here really,
I guess,
you know,
the count variables only used kind of within the lexical extent of the lead.
Right?
Uh so so there,
I mean at least as it pertains to that particular variable,
um there's no difference between dynamic and static scoping.
Right.
And so uh well I remember you know in the late 90s when I was
still a research assistant at the university,
we were thinking that in fact a lot of Emacs list code,
right,
There is kind of the configuration variables that you have up there that are global,
but kind of when you have purely local bindings are usually used in a way that would
work just the same with status scoping and dynamic scoping.
Right.
And so you know,
we actually did this shameless plug.
So this is an ICMP paper and I think into that came out in 2000 and
one where primarily my student at the time that he has no Ebola implemented analysis that
would figure out whether kind of static and dynamic scoping would coincide.
We found out that indeed they do coincide for most,
you know,
a large percentage,
99 something percent of all the variables.
And so we thought,
I think you did the smart thing by evolving uh max listen to two different
dialects and we just thought we were just going to transform all the code into a form that was
agnostic to whether it was dynamically or statically scoped and then we would just change the
language underneath and the code wouldn't notice uh alas uh as it goes with many
things that originate a research that unfortunately never materialized actually.
Yeah,
I was wondering,
you know,
I back then I thought it was a very promising path and I'm
curious why you didn't go any further but he has
graduated is probably the reason um OK.
As as it goes right as we know that goes yeah,
it does take many years of dedication to push through such a
change.
Yeah.
And to your credit.
Uh you've done that for me.
Yes,
we we have seen we have seen this on the impact by the
here you you staying on.
If you go back to my to my example.
Uh huh.
Okay.
So you can see here at the top it says lexical binding.
No,
we actually call it lexical binding and not coping.
I guess that was the type of thing doesn't stay up there.
There's a type of No,
no,
it's not the type of just keeping anyway,
so this is actually the little notes in the file that says
this fight is using the new direct as opposed to the old dynamic least
coat.
Okay.
And this was introduced.
This took many years.
This is not,
you know,
it's a it's a very simple feature if you think about it and it took many years to introduce
uh again details in the paper.
So,
um,
Stefan looking at your code.
Right?
I see that.
Um Well you're you're assembling a string there.
Right.
With a contact function.
But then you have this function called proper ties and face.
Can you explain what that piece of code does?
Right.
So in in Emacsimum strength don't contain only characters,
but every character can have extra additional properties.
They call text properties.
And so you can you can use those properties to add all kinds of information to your strength.
One of the important information is this face property which is used to affect the way
the tax would be printed.
If they are displayed if it is to be displayed.
So here,
for example,
replace the media buffer prompt face onto that that text
so that when it's displayed,
it uses a particular color that corresponds to the the face
called me a lot of problems.
Okay,
so remember an Emacs 18,
you know,
early,
early nineties.
Right.
It didn't have properties yet.
So I guess the language evolved to meet the requirements of displaying like
multicolored and multi phone texas like that.
Right.
And so I think that's a good example where for a change of programming language
actually evolves according to the requirements of the users as opposed to the
requirements of the programming language researchers uh like ourselves.
Yeah,
that's right.
That's right.
Okay.
So but uh that's cool.
So there's this fancy string data type but I want to get back to variables uh just briefly.
So it's not just that we have dynamic scoping,
right.
Uh There's another feature kind of baked into the core language called buffer local variables.
Could you illustrate what that is?
Mhm Yeah,
I think we have some example here actually.
That's right.
Here we have an example but here we see this tool bar
map variable Okay,
Which is a which is assigned a particular value using sexual local.
So set your local is a is a in this case particular macro.
But what it does really is actually it sets the variable but you know,
in a buffer local way,
which means that it only changes the value in this particular buffet.
So you know,
every every piece of text is toward in,
you know in the buffer and and you always have the
current buffer,
you know,
whenever you're working in a mini max list,
there's always the current buffer and the current position within this buffer is part of the normal
state.
And so when you look up a variable global variables such as this google map,
it will well look it up in the current buffer so every
buffer can have a different value for this variable.
Those variables are actually fully global so they have the same value and all buffers but you can you can set
specific values in specific buffers like this is you here,
this is used here for this tool bar map which is as the,
you know,
the map here refers to a key map.
Okay.
It's a data structure used to say what happens in response to a particular
event.
Which which which command which which current should be
executed?
Responsive,
particularly user event.
So in this case it's what would happen when you use the toolbar?
You can actually you can see I think you can see the toolbar right now but you access a
toolbar which you can now see at the top.
Ok,
So here you see there are various buttons.
And so these two warriors is actually created by uh was
described by a particular list,
data structure.
And you can you can have every buffer,
can have a different toolbar to adapt it to the particular contents in the in the buffer.
So if it's a buffer that displays,
you know,
a normal piece of codes,
then you're going to have buttons which are specific to editing codes.
But then if you're walker contains,
for example the least of your your email and then you will
have other buttons so that you can create and you and your main message or send me
etcetera.
So that's that's what this set to local.
Does it lets you change the toolbar according to which water is
current.
Alright,
so here,
really the core semantics of the programming language interact with the fact that is running an editor,
right?
This is this is like a feature that's probably pretty much no other appropriate language has
uh you really need this concept of buffer and the current buffer and things like that.
Right.
Alright.
Yeah,
maximus to a large extent is normal list but there are a few places where it
was.
Yeah,
that's one of them.
Well,
I bet there's interesting interactions between dynamic scoping and buffer local variables.
Right?
Yes.
Yeah.
There's been lots of bugs over the years and that have been I think for the last few years has
been stable.
Yes.
Yeah.
So and we talk about that in the paper you should mention.
Right,
okay.
So um apart,
I mean lexical scoping,
I mean you said it's not a big feature but it really is pretty big,
right?
It's one of the core parts of language that you've changed,
but apart from lexical scoping and you know,
I think,
you know,
the string representation that we looked at earlier is kind of a detail.
Was there a lot of fundamental evolution of the underlying core language and the next list over the years?
No,
very little.
You actually have been very stable.
If you think in terms of the actual language itself,
the core language has not evolved very much.
The style has changed,
the implementation has changed to some extent,
but the core languages stayed pretty much the same.
So how do they do that?
Right?
I mean,
the Haskell people,
they add a new features of the language every week.
Right,
pretty much.
Uh So how come the next list doesn't seem there doesn't seem to be a strong call
on extending the core language every week there,
but of course there's first,
the fact that I'm actually is just a tool for Emacs,
so there's no point in improving immaculate itself,
you know,
that's not the goal.
The goal is to improve the editor and so the experience for the,
for the end user,
you know,
when I was a language re social like to add thanks to my
language,
it's put forward.
But you know,
Richard and eli the one of the current maintain is you keep reminding us that,
you know?
Yeah,
well this,
this is all nice and good,
but,
you know,
can we actually see features for the end user instead?
So that's part of the reason for the stability,
I think the other reason is is that it's not it's not needed.
Okay,
so that we can extend the language,
we are changing the core language because we can use macros.
Okay,
let me show something there.
Uh,
I'm just gonna do that in my favorite the next uh for a moment.
Right.
I think the enabling feature that pretty much every list pass.
Is that um you know,
program code?
Program source code.
There's a data structure that looks just the same,
Right?
And so if we,
for example,
have Like FA five,
we can add a quote an apostrophe to the beginning,
and we have something that evaluates to a piece of data that prints out
exactly like the function called source code that you see above.
Right.
And so,
so program source code can be manipulated via Emacs list code.
Right?
And so you could have fancier coke and you can't have an example here.
Um So here's a slightly fancier
piece of code that doesn't just use a quote that uses a back would also one of the fundamental features that all this is
pretty much have.
And with back won't you can kind of slice little things in there um by
evaluating expression inside the quoted forum,
so for example,
like area size here,
area name and then it val uh and we can see here that uh,
there's a data type in Emacs list,
the symbol,
which would print it out,
looks just like a variable and has exactly the same syntax.
So you can see here,
we bind a bunch of variables and then these variables through the comma here,
get inserted into the output.
And so if I evaluate this,
I see a form here.
I mean,
never mind that.
It's a special form called do that Stefan.
You you never use,
but it's also the same and scheme.
So I I've used it on occasion,
Uh,
and you don't you don't like it.
Yeah,
well that's your loss.
But you can see that it splits the area size,
for example,
in here.
Right?
11 here.
And also,
you know,
in advance this is variable in it here.
And so so you can assemble program called programmatically.
And not only that you can turn this into what's called a macro,
which is what you mentioned.
So macron looks looks very similar to a function,
but the difference is that,
you know,
kind of the function that gets defined here,
gets called by the computer whenever it sees a parenthesis
form that starts with Phil array.
Right?
So if I do this right,
I can then go or an array is kind of the sequence abstraction in Emacs
so I can define a variable here.
That's a string,
which is also a kind of um which is also a kind of um uh sequence.
And I can use this Phil array form and it will
Um well just execute and we can see that it overwrites all the
characters in the string by 65,
essentially by expanding um into,
you know,
this new form that we saw above and and compiling that,
right?
And we can also kind of uh you know,
see what it's doing,
we can call a function called macro expand,
which will just say,
see,
you know,
show us that,
Phil array forum evaluates into core code here,
and we can see that do was also a macro right?
It expands into that let while combination that we see here.
Um And so it's pretty easy with the facilities of the language.
Yeah,
talking about this actually,
that reminds me we have a,
you know,
rather than manipulate codes during macro expansion,
uh we can manipulate codas data,
you know,
during runtime and name actually with dynamics,
hoping we could do things like like this,
I really could say,
oh,
let's say,
you know,
he said that we're Function that Adds 42.
Yeah,
all my brand sees.
So it's like a data structure that looks like a lambda expression.
Okay,
right.
Exactly.
That's what you manipulate.
Typically macro expansion time.
Right?
But you can actually use it at runtime directly.
I can fund call this function directly,
Which is actually not a function.
It's a list I can plan called list and it does give me the 46 you would expect.
Okay,
that's that's bizarre.
So,
so it has to be kind of whenever it calls a function,
it has to check whether well,
it's not actually a function,
but it's a list.
And maybe that list looks like the source of a function.
Okay.
This is because originally this is exactly how functions were represented at one
time.
There was no difference between,
you know,
the the legs that represent the TsX that represents
the number and the actual value.
So the,
the evaluation of the land,
that was just the Land itself,
the member list.
So that's like the ultimate,
that's like the ultimate abstraction leak.
Right?
The representation of abstractions themselves leak.
Exactly.
Okay.
So of course,
then when by code was introduced,
it was a notion of a real actual function objects distinct from
a list.
But that state,
because a lot of course existed,
there's a lot of code that quotes Lando's with a quote.
We don't actually need to quote Landers because land itself is a macro that just adds
a little function around it.
And we can actually see it here.
Let's say where is it cylinder.
Okay.
So we'll see.
Look at the definition of lambda.
Oh,
look at that.
Mm hmm.
Okay.
Cure.
Yeah.
Oh,
there's a lot of dark string.
And then we see just the definition just as the function in France of the landlord.
And uh,
the function means it's going to get compiled,
right?
Hopefully.
Well,
the function means that it quote said as a function instead of quoting it as raw
data.
So,
so the compiler is going to see that this is a function and invite them by it.
Exactly.
Okay.
But but because presumably because because this was,
you know,
not didn't exist at the very beginning of Emacs of actually
max.
Yes.
The habit of just using quote to Portland does
tom.
Okay.
So even even nowadays you can still see a lot of code and if you,
if you look for it on on the web even more,
uh,
you know,
there's lots of lots of code snippets that had the language quoted with a little quote.
Okay,
I bet that's a pain for your static scoping stuff.
Right.
Exactly.
If the dynamic scoping,
this doesn't really matter because,
you know,
the code is,
it doesn't need to know anything.
You know,
you don't need to comply,
especially in order to to preserve dynamic scoping.
But the likes of Mexico scoping,
you actually need your,
when you value your lender,
you need to capture the environment,
right?
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
I can't do that when you just have the source code.
When you,
when you just have the quote,
the evaluation of the quotes by definition just returns the lists and has no
opportunity to capture the environment.
So.
And of course the same thing,
the compiler can look inside and see that there's a reference to some of the variable which were
renamed and those kinds of things.
Okay.
So it seemed compatible with lexical scoping and introduces,
you know,
a federal of pain when doing the conversion of going from the old
dialect to the new dialect.
Okay.
So here's an evolution that still needs to happen,
right.
The evolution of coding style and the nice list.
It's still ongoing.
Yes.
Okay.
We,
we fix those and within the actual code base of Emacs by now
actually it's recently that we finished doing that,
but,
but in the code out there,
it's still,
It will be around us for another 20 years at least.
Okay,
wow.
Okay.
So talking about Emacs list within the context of Emacs is fine.
But also called X.
Max for many years with the the kind of more feature full implementation with
graphical bells and whistles and and what happened at the
language level in terms of maybe of implementation or or language
itself,
you tell us something about it?
Well,
I mean the focus in the development of lucY MX,
which is what it was called back then,
wasn't so much on the surface language,
but there were a few nobel things that happened on the implementation side.
I think one of the first things would that that happened was that James Lewinsky wrote a new bike code
compiler,
um that that ended up in lucid Emacs and I think later migrated back
into a canoe Emacs.
Um,
I think one other notable differences has to do with when Emacs starts
starts up.
Right.
So Emacs,
when it starts up,
a whole bunch of list code has to be present in order for it to work properly.
And we don't want to compile or evaluate or even load all that list code each
time the editor starts up where at least we didn't want to do that in the nineties
when computers were still slower.
Right?
You don't want to do that?
Yeah.
So the idea is that you would fire up.
So during the build process right,
you would fire up Emacs or x Emacs uh load all that this code and then somehow
dump,
you know dump Emacs.
Uh so that you could then start up much faster.
And the way it was originally done was there was a very operating specific operating system
specific facility that which is dumped the operating system process
uh to disk and then be able to start that up again.
And I remember that being very very fragile and I remember
you know spending countless hours debugging ai X code because you know some field
and the binary format had shifted or something like that.
And so um there was a long running effort and ex Emacs to
improve on the internal data representation to make it possible to just dump the heap of X.
Max and then be able to load that heap quickly into the running process later.
And um so um and and and the way that that happened was that you know
every object would get a run time description of the runtime
format that was written and that was then used to write out the heat representation of able to
load it back in.
Uh Did did I remember we were doing that just by ourselves for X.
M.
X.
Did something similar happened with with new Emacs?
Actually it happened just a few years ago,
so we suffered through the what was called an exact process
of figuring out some way to dump the
state of the process into a form that can be started again.
Okay.
And only a couple of years ago that that was changing any max version 27 that came out
fairly recently,
wow.
Okay.
I was I was curious what about those,
you know those data structures you say that describes the data to help dump it where they
used for something else?
Yeah,
well we also used them then to feed the garbage collector right?
To tell the garbage collector what the object layout was and that enabled us to implement new garbage collector.
Actually one of our students,
my students Marcus Castellani developed an incremental garbage collector because one
thing that people really really hated in Emacs and Emacs was when there was a message appearance had
said garbage collecting right?
And then you knew you were in for a little weight um and even if it was just one second wait
it was it was annoying.
So we fixed that in X.
M.
X.
By just having an incremental collector that got rid of the pauses,
right?
I don't know about the just because that seems like a lot of work.
We fixed it in a simple way.
We just removed the message.
Well okay so that's so when I
use glue Emacs I sometimes weight but I don't know who to blame.
So now I know.
Okay back.
So but maybe maybe one there's one notable difference really on the language
side that is um that is significant between new Emacs and Emacs,
right?
When lucy gimmicks was originally developed,
a few of the things that were relevant for window and got their own data structures.
So let me maybe try to show that here.
So here's my X.
M.
X.
Again.
Uh So one example is for example the mod map,
right?
Emacs at the time just represented characters as numbers and um
so uh and the idea was that you would have a
mode map which was a key map.
It would map key bindings to functions that were called.
Right?
And uh if you evaluate something like this mode map,
you can see that there's like a hash mark and then there's angle brackets and they show you
that there is an internal data structure um uh that that
represents the key map and that was a departure from the way it was in gooey max,
right?
And I think it still is that way.
And can we max to this day?
Right.
Oh yes,
very much so you can see the mood man.
Yeah.
For us,
you know,
we actually see the map.
Okay.
Oh,
it's a list.
So of course another another abstraction leak right there.
Right.
Um and you know,
I think it it goes to the core of the design of of Emacs and Emacs
miss.
Okay.
You know,
we were talking about you know,
the idea of free software and how it influenced the design of Emacs.
I think there's you know,
there was a very clear and and there still is a clear desire to try to
avoid abstraction boundaries.
Okay.
If you want to have,
you know,
you want to have abstraction just by by a convention,
so you you want to have data structures which you can you can look inside
and dig in and you see all the messy details and change them as
much as you want if you want to you want to have some kind of distraction on top of it,
so you don't have to do that.
But there's no effort to try to hide it to make it make it OK.
Right.
But at the time there was a lot of code which was aware of the fact that key
maps were lists and just manipulated them using the list functions.
Right?
And we got rid of that for losing Emacs.
But it also means,
I mean,
you're you're talking as though that's uh you know,
it's it's a wind city.
It's a wind only situation where users are empowered.
But the problem is of course,
you probably it probably have a very hard time than ever changing the format of these data structures.
Right?
Should that prove advantageous?
Yeah,
that's true.
Actually,
we changed the extended the format of the key map Early Max
24 I think,
so that they could have several parents like in X c max.
You know,
there's,
you know,
key maps have have a notion of a hierarchy where the key map and have a parent key map.
So until Emacs 20 for there was only one parent.
Then we tried to add more and that was very difficult to retrofit without breaking existing
cause you had Yeah.
Yeah.
And so that's a lot easier when you have abstraction uh reasons.
But I guess this is about making life easier for the developer is not so much the users maybe.
Uh So there's an interesting trade off there.
All right.
You mentioned the fact that you use conventions in order to
deal with abstraction boundaries.
Right.
And the obvious place,
uh we should talk about this is that has to do with the module system.
Right?
We have lots of people are developing packages for Emacs.
You know,
there's surely more a couple of million lines of code of external
packages for Emacs that people load all the time.
Um How do we deal with us these days?
Right.
Yeah,
there is,
there is a good question.
Yeah.
So we go back to this,
uh I search example we have,
you can see right right away what is the solution we we
we settled on,
we just have a kind of poor man's name,
space construct where every function,
every global function and global terrible definitions.
Okay,
it's true.
But with the prefects we should all name,
prefix,
name,
space prefects and there's nothing magical about it.
You know,
we just use usually you're the fine name and then a dash or something like this
and people have to follow that principle and not everybody follows it in this.
Sometimes some surprises,
but over the years it has served us very well.
Okay,
that's pretty amazing,
right?
Because if you believe all the module systems,
people,
and all the ml researchers and so on,
its impossible to manage a couple of million lines of code using just social conventions and without the
abstraction boundaries of like a module system with strong interfaces.
Yeah,
I'm not sure.
It's actually why they think it's it's uh they think it's necessary.
Clearly,
it's convenient,
it's convenient to be able to use whichever name,
and also to be able to use short names.
Part of it is probably has to do with just the syntax of uh of list
that doesn't make it too painful to have long function names where the
indentation and those kinds of things place reasonably well,
because you can easily have the arguments below the function is on the side,
I guess something like this,
but to a large extent is just,
you know,
you see extra,
you have your your function and global variables with the longer name and what you would
ideally have,
but you will live with this very successful.
There's constantly pressure to try to to introduce
some new mechanism for having actual name space,
but it still hasn't happened yet.
Okay,
so yeah,
Uh I think the next 20 years are gonna be interesting,
right?
There's pressure to make changes.
On the other hand,
the language has stayed very stable.
Um Yeah,
and actually there's a there's a good argument for keeping the long,
long names.
One of the strongest argument is is that,
you know,
in in on the side of the tooling,
it makes the tooling much easier because you don't need to pay attention to the context in order
to know what is the meaning of each identified.
So when you,
when you look for a function,
well,
if you look at the function I search and we have to change,
that's the function.
You know,
you don't have to say oh,
in which name space am I should I should I use look for other users that
correspond to this particular name space,
which also means that you can do searches with tools that know nothing about your language.
Yeah,
like I can go I can go on on that dot go and search for I search and we have to change.
They couldn't give me actual actual results,
actual matters.
Yeah,
I agree.
That's not advantage.
So,
Stefan,
I think we're pretty much out of time.
Uh so we should wrap this up.
Right.
Um so Emacs list has seen a great deal of evolution is staying
remarkably stable.
Uh We're looking I'm looking forward to another 20 years of Emacs uh on my
desktop and programming Emacs list in 20 years.
Yes,
same thing.
I'm I I think evolution has been very limited at the core level,
but in terms of the actual language being used,
there's been a lot of changes because of macros.
So I'm looking forward to what is going to look like in Mhm.
In 20 or so years Hubble.
What happened?
Seven maybe?
Yeah,
that'd be nice.
I'm not sure.
I'm up for spending that much time on writing a paper though,
but I think it's time to give your hair again.
Yeah,
but I guess it's time to give the audience an opportunity to ask some questions and engage in some interactions,
See you around and hope you'll have a great conference.
Yeah,
thank you very much.
well,
thank you both for an excellent and enjoyable taught.
Uh this is a an area that's a little different some of the
shows,
they were conventional language presentations and I thought both the content and the style
was great.
I have a couple questions and slack remind other people if you have other questions for
the for the authors,
please add that to slack the first one.
By the way,
there are a lot of comments in slack that all said not a question.
So after you're done,
please read through those a lot of arguments about origins of different kind of list
and corrections on your t co expertise.
But back to the questions um from uh will christian
in stanford.
One trend I've noticed in recent systems adopting
dynamically scoped features is to promote extensive bility.
For example,
context objects in react us.
What do you think are the main lessons from Emacs list that these systems should use
in designing the next generation of dynamic scoping?
Yeah.
Should I take that one Stefan uh for you?
So so we actually talked about this right just a couple of weeks ago in
that.
Um so so I mean these days I work a lot in software architecture and software
architecture Education.
Right?
And there's this issue of modularity and I remember talking to the author of pickled list,
which is dynamically type lisp many years ago uh about modularity.
And we were fighting and I was uh I was working on scheme 48 which is statically scoped at the
time.
And he said,
well,
modularity is the ability to take an existing system and we reach into its guts so you can make
it do what you want done,
right.
Um Which is an unconventional view of modularity.
Um but but I can't really say it's completely wrong,
right?
Um I mean I mean we want modular software to be reusable and in
many ways the dynamic scoping in Emacs lisp or some of the other dynamic features that you can
just sort of set a function to be a different one,
replace it by something else and so on.
Are what makes it possible for users to modify and to make Emacs
um you know,
do what you want done.
So um I think that's one side of it that it's uh you know
that it's important to have these kinds of capabilities.
On the other hand,
it's really um I think it's really easy to kind of lose an overview and
and to lose a good understanding of what's going on in your system right?
With with Emacs list you can usually get it to do what you want done,
but you often get unexpected interactions between parts of the system.
And the paper talks a little bit about this uh when it comes to a mechanism known as advice right?
Which is also a kind of a dynamic extension mechanism in the language.
Um And so I think,
you know,
kind of the trend at the conferences that I've gone to in recent years,
I C.
F P and so on has been to create like unbreakable abstractions and
but also the systems that result from that or that result from tighter abstractions are
particularly editors are just not as flexible at runtime
in making it possible to change their behavior um as Emacs is.
So I think there's I don't have an answer to that question.
I think that's an avenue for research.
Um and in particular the context mechanism and react.
I I happen to be familiar with that also went underwent a redesign substantial
redesigning its time.
It's just difficult to get this kind of stuff to get the right balance between,
you know,
changeability and adaptability of the system and at the same time um you know,
getting the system completely keeping the system comprehensible if that makes any sense.
Yeah,
if I can add something to that.
Uh I think I think the experience we've had with Emacs list and and the dynamic
facilities in there,
all that you can have a lot of dynamic features like dynamic scoping,
you know,
kind of unchecked ways despite all my my own notions
of how it should work as a you know static typing kind of
researcher.
But I think one element that is important is that it has to be
you need to to develop a set of conventions along with it.
And that takes that probably takes a lot more time.
Okay,
all right,
so the next question is from trolls,
Henrickson,
The University of Copenhagen list isn't particularly known for its text processing
capabilities and many other highly dynamic languages now exists.
His list still the best language for creating Emacs style editors,
So.
Absolutely right.
Uh I'm not sure it's somewhat it's it's as much a language question as a question of
if it offers the right data types for processing text.
Right.
I remember reading an article about the the the editor buffer representation,
they using visual studio code and they needed to go to a horrendous lengths
uh you know,
to work to make it work efficiently.
That is all done in c but it's available at Emacsimalist language level?
Um arguably uh you know,
arguably there's some facilities in other languages.
I recall snowball,
for example,
which has advanced text processing but given the flexibility of list,
there is no reason why you can't have any text processing capability that you want an Emacs lift.
So,
absolutely,
it's the best language.
Okay,
let's see,
the next one is from marc laws.
It's been pointed out the dynamic scoping is really not a historical artifact but
a means for allowing some parameter ization without having to explicitly plum state
context through every function.
Do you have any remarks on the implications?
This has for the possibility of even being able to make Emacs multi threaded,
for example,
using TLS to simulate dynamic scope while being thread friendly.
That's one for you with Stefan,
I think.
Mm
Yeah,
I think that is a hard one.
Multi threading is is clearly a hard problem for
Emacs list,
mostly because of all these states and this
heavy reliance on dynamic scoping
and so yeah,
I'm not sure exactly what I can say about this,
but it you know,
it can be an opportunity,
but I think at least in the context of Emacs it's more of a problem than a
solution.
Well,
maybe I can contribute something.
I mean,
I mean there's a sexual multi threading in the paper,
first of all,
and about how that relates to dynamic scoping.
Uh getting the interaction between threading and dynamic scoping tends to be difficult and
also difficult to reconcile with modularity.
Ah,
so yeah,
I think,
I think in the case of in the case of Emacs,
you know,
the diaries coping,
Making dynamic scoping work was multi cheap.
Yeah,
I think Okay,
blanked out on that one.
Internet clips.
That's fine.
We'll go on to the next one.
Okay,
the next one is a multi part.
I'm just going to ask 11 part of it uh from Yoshiki Takashima
cmu do you think the number of Ellis programmers is hindering its development?
So is it worth considering thinking of Ellis.
Bassett compiler Target for other languages.
Yeah.
Mhm.
Isn't it?
Isn't an Emacs list back in for idris.
Well,
I always considered a list to be implemented in a fairly inefficient way.
And so to be fundamentally fairly slow.
Uh I've since had the opportunity to learn that.
It's actually not that slow,
it,
you know,
it's a fairly average performance,
let's say.
But I wouldn't,
you know,
I wouldn't promote it as a,
as a target,
very compiler,
you know,
I don't think it's very adapted to that.
Okay.
One could imagine targeting the byte code.
Right,
Stefan,
I'm sorry.
Yeah,
you can imagine talking to the byte code for for slightly different front line,
but then you might as well just use,
you know,
use uh another another approach as well.
So,
you know,
why would you want to use another source language basically.
So if you want to run with an Emacs,
it's probably easier to just write you actually code directly so that the set of
features matches.
Yeah.
Okay,
from God,
I steal what changes,
if any,
have been made to Emacs this primarily for the sake of improved performance rather
than for a new functionality.
Very little performance has rarely been
a an issue when it comes to the language that is,
the language has a fairly,
you know,
fairly simple implementation is reasonably slowing in this respect,
but most of the elements that take time are actually implemented in c anyway.
They're part of the library basically.
And so the negative self has naturally been changed to,
to accommodate speed.
Yeah,
if we're talking about the source language.
Right.
Um of course,
implementation has seen quite a few improvements,
Yes.
Um Okay,
10 to 1 or two more I think.
Andrew black from Portland State says the first version of Emacs list that I used
was in Gosselin's Emacs for UNIX.
The early versions did not have function parameters.
As I recall,
the convention was used dynamically bound variables to get information into functions.
Was this just a limitation of the Gosling implementation?
Was it also a feature of the early tico based versions?
Uh I have no idea.
So my impression was I I never got to the point where I fully learned uh
Tico language,
my impression was that it did not have named parameters.
So Ticos extended language is completely enlist like we should note.
Right.
Um and I think we had an example of that in the talk and I don't think named
max also had a completely different list.
Yeah,
yeah,
that's right.
No,
I mean the characterization of gasoline taxes correct.
Right.
It did not have named function parameters and that's in the paper as well but um
I don't think Tico had that notion either.
Uh like a programming language with regular named parameters.
Mom,
I think it had registered,
it's just basically wearables.
That sounds familiar going back a lot of years um from
paul uh when and how does external packages get bundled into
MX's core?
Oh and it just happens and it
happens in ways that nobody notices because there is there is no
technical definition of what is the core?
It's more what people consider as being part of the core.
So there are packages to be part of the court,
you have to be distributed with Emacs,
but just being distributed with Emacs is not sufficient for people to consider it us
cord.
And I think if you asked different people,
different people would consider different parts of being part of core or not.
So it's a fuzzy,
fuzzy notion.
It's not a question of a habit and what is commonly used within within the code.
Okay.
Yeah.
All right.
So I think this will be the last question from Karen doping often of us.
I love the extensive bility of the list when it provides an editing experience unlike any
other editor out there.
But out of curiosity,
are there lessons that Ellis may be able to learn from the scripting languages
of other modern editors,
such as Js for V S code or neo them?
Yeah.
Mike,
I think the answer is no.
Uh,
so,
um,
I mean,
as I,
as I said,
right,
I mean the great advantages an email list,
you can really do things at runtime.
Whereas uh,
these modern editors love them,
I don't know much about,
but um,
I think you customize it in lieu uh,
these days,
the main question is so much isn't so much about the language,
but if the language enables being able to do things at runtime.
Right?
And a lot of like visual studio code,
you modify any of its plug ins,
you have to restart the editor as an example.
Right.
And so that's something that we don't need to do uh in Emacs.
And so I'm not sure there's a great lesson for either system organization or
or language design there.
I don't think I would change email list to accommodate um the way their way of doing
things.
Yeah,
I think in terms of in terms of the language that I don't think there is much to be gained from
there,
there are some very interesting aspects that we do want to integrate from from those
editors,
but they're not really part of the language there.
More part of the design of how you structure,
you know,
the the description of the language that you want to parse so that you do highlighting for example and
those kinds of things and re display for example,
might be my favorite thing to borrow from these.
Mhm.
Okay,
well,
I'm going to cut off the questions there,
but I want to thank you both for like I said,
an excellent paper,
wonderful presentation.
And for what I can see from the non question discussions,
bringing back a lot of arguments and discussions from the history of
editors and list that I haven't seen in decades.
So thank you both very,
very much.
And thanks Brent for your hard work.
Right?
If the paper is any good uh It's at least as much as much your fault as it is ours.
Yeah,
that's kind of you to say it,
but thank you.